The history of Denmark as a unified kingdom began in the eighth century,
but historic documents describe the geographic area and the people
living there— the Danes —as early as five hundred AD. These early documents
include the writings of Jordanes and Procopius. With the Christianization
of the Danes c. nine hundred and sixty AD, it is clear that there existed a kingship. Queen
Margrethe the second can trace her lineage back to the Viking kings Gorm the Old
and Harald Bluetooth from this time, thus making the Monarchy of
Denmark the oldest in Europe. The area now known as Denmark has a
rich prehistory, having been populated by several prehistoric cultures and
people for about twelve thousand years, since the end of the last ice age.
Denmarks history has particularly been influenced by its geographical
location between the North and Baltic seas, a strategically and
economically important placement between Sweden and Germany, at
the center of mutual struggles for control of the Baltic Sea (dominium
maris baltici). Denmark was long in disputes with Sweden over control of
Skanelandene and with Germany over control of Schleswig (a Danish
fief) and Holstein (a German fief).
Eventually, Denmark lost these conflicts and ended up ceding first
Skaneland to Sweden and later Schleswig-Holstein to the German
Empire. After the eventual cession of Norway in eighteen fourteen, Denmark retained control of the old Norwegian colonies of the Faroe Islands, Greenland
and Iceland. During the twentieth century, Iceland gained independence,
Greenland and the Faroese became integral parts of the Kingdom of
Denmark and North Schleswig reunited with Denmark in nineteen twenty after a referendum. During World War two, Denmark was occupied by Nazi
Germany, but was eventually liberated by British forces of the Allies in
nineteen fourty five, after which it joined the United Nations. In the aftermath of World
War two, and with the emergence of the subsequent Cold War, Denmark
was quick to join the military alliance of NATO as a founding member in
nineteen fourty nine.